

The Accidental Taxonomist: Second Edition




Chapter 11

Taxonomy Implementation and Evolution

Taxonomies: adding a little to your data so that you can get a lot more out of it.

—Bob DuCharme

Taxonomy work involves more than just building new taxonomies. After all, full-time employed taxonomists tend to keep their jobs after they finish building a taxonomy. Chapter 2 lists a number of related duties that taxonomists perform, including documentation, test-searching, and indexing support. In addition, and more significantly, a taxonomy needs to be implemented in different systems, maintained, revised, adapted to new indexing or search implementations, merged or mapped with another taxonomy, and possibly translated into another language. You might maintain, revise, or adapt the taxonomy that you created, but you could also be required to manage and adapt a taxonomy created by someone else. As noted earlier, a taxonomy is never done. Because taxonomies are used to support the indexing of ever-growing and ever-changing content repositories, their terms must be updated and modified in keeping with evolving topics. Over time, you may also be able to collect data on what keywords end users are using, and thus you can modify terms to more closely match.

Taxonomy Exchange and Interoperability

A taxonomy is not fully functional if left in a taxonomy management system. Although some taxonomy management systems include modules for indexing (manual or automated) and/or search, most likely your content resides somewhere else, and at least some of your end users also use different systems for searching or browsing. Therefore, the completed taxonomy needs to be implemented or deployed into other systems to be used. This process typically involves exporting the taxonomy from your taxonomy management system and then having it imported into other systems. An existing taxonomy already in use may also need to be implemented into other systems, such as those of third-party partners or vendors. The ability to use data, in this case a taxonomy, in different applications, implementations, or software systems, whether proprietary, commercial, or open source, such as on the web, is known either as “exchange” or “interoperability.” The term “interoperability” covers both the exchange of data to allow the same taxonomy to be used between different systems and also the linkages between different controlled vocabularies, which is discussed later in this chapter in the section of Mapping Taxonomies.

A taxonomy contains complex information, so a standard interoperable format is needed for exporting and re-importing or for importing an external licensed taxonomy. A CSV (comma-separated values) file format, typically derived from an Excel file, can serve this purpose, but it lacks any standard definitions. Therefore, the CSV format typically requires manipulation to set up the columns as required by a specific application, which is easier to do in relatively simple taxonomies than in complex thesauri. A more robust interoperable format, suitable for even complex thesauri, is XML, but it too requires further standardization.

XML

XML (www.w3.org/XML), which stands for eXtensible Markup Language, uses nested tags, like HTML, but the creator can define the tags. Definitions for the tags are stored in a related document called a schema. All commercial taxonomy management software supports some form of XML exporting of the taxonomies, so you do not need to create your own XML tags. Figure 11.1 is an example of XML output generated by the thesaurus software MultiTes for a single preferred term, “Bookplates,” from the Getty Art & Architecture Thesaurus.



Figure 11.1 An example of XML output for a single preferred term, “Bookplates,” from the thesaurus software MultiTes (same selected record as in Figure 5.4)

XML tags are user defined and not standard, in contrast to HTML or various metadata standards (e.g., MARC or Dublin Core). Therefore, the tags used with an XML taxonomy export file have varied in different thesaurus software products. Others have followed a quite different tagged format, with more specifics, such as the following:


<relationship type=“associative” name=“Related To” termId=“51”>Child care</relationship>



Thesaurus software usually does not include a schema document, and even if it did, it would not cover any user-defined relationships, categories, or notes. Therefore, if you want to import a nonstandard XML file from thesaurus management software into an indexing system, content management system, or another taxonomy management software application, you need to write the schema yourself, find someone in your organization who can, contract the thesaurus software vendor for the additional service, or, if licensing an externally published taxonomy, contract the thesaurus vendor to do it.

Zthes

In an attempt to provide a standard for the various possible XML tag specifications for thesauri, beginning in 1999 the British software engineer Mike Taylor developed an XML schema specific for the “semantic hierarchies” of terms as described in ISO 2788 (the predecessor at the time to ISO 2596) and ANSI/NISO Z39.19, which is called Zthes (zthes.z3950.org), the “Z” coming from Z39.19.

The Zthes schema specifies the following elements: termId, termUpdate, termName, termQualifier, termType, termLanguage, termVocabulary, termCategory, termStatus, termApproval, term Sortkey, termNote, termCreatedDate, termCreatedBy, termModified Date, termModifiedBy, postings, and relation. Subrecords specify the relation (relationship) type. Figure 11.2 is an example of Zthes XML of the NASA Thesaurus (www.sti.nasa.gov/sti-tools/#thesaurus).

Zthes gained a sufficient reputation as a thesaurus standard that several thesaurus software vendors have supported it as an export format, including Data Harmony, Synaptica, and (previously) Smartlogic Semaphore. Zthes, however, has not stayed up to date, and is limited to thesauri only and designed for other kinds of controlled vocabularies. So, without a revision since 2006 and with the growing demand for Semantic Web interoperability standards instead, its support by thesaurus software vendors has dropped.1



Figure 11.2 An extract example of ZThes1.0 representation for a single preferred term, “galactic clusters,” from the NASA thesaurus. (The NT and RT relations are too numerous, so to save space only the first three are shown.)

RDF, OWL, and SKOS

The RDF (Resource Description Framework) language, or variations of it, is also used as an interoperable format for taxonomies. RDF (www.w3.org/RDF), supported by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), is a framework rather than a strict standard. RDF, which is expressable in XML syntax, was designed for describing web resources and giving each resource and the resource’s attributes persistent identifiers, such as URIs or URLs. An extension of RDF deals specifically with a vocabulary description language but does not get into such specifics as term relationship types. Rather, it provides a mechanism for the user to define them. Although RDF uses XML syntax, it is more complex than a tagging language, since it uses what are called classes, properties, resources, and collections. A better analogy for RDF syntax would be the coding used in object-oriented programming languages.

What is more relevant for taxonomies are two other W3C standards or specifications built on RDF: the Web Ontology Language (called by a slightly indirect acronym, OWL) and the SKOS. Since there are no W3C standards specifically for thesauri, these are the most appropriate.

OWL (www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/OWL), a formal W3C recommendation of 2004, is a semantic markup language for publishing and sharing ontologies on the web and supports Semantic Web applications. OWL features a larger vocabulary, a stronger syntax, and greater machine interpretability than does RDF. As OWL is intended specifically for ontologies, rather than simpler thesauri or taxonomies, it may actually be more than you need. A revised version of OWL, OWL 2, was published in 2012, which includes some new features, functionality, and expressivity. Taxonomy/ontology management software that supports RDF/OWL exporting includes Data Harmony, Mondeca, PoolParty, Protégé, SAS, Semaphore, Synaptica, and TopBraid EVN.

SKOS (www.w3.org/2004/02/skos) is a proposed standard that is an application of RDF specifically for knowledge organization systems, such as thesauri and taxonomies. SKOS was published as a W3C “recommendation” in 2009, and while it is often considered a “standard,” it remains a work in progress. The word “simple” in the name implies that it is simpler than OWL. In SKOS, the fundamental element is a concept, rather than a “term,” and SKOS also defines preferred and alternate (nonpreferred) labels for concepts, along with (scope) notes and definitions. SKOS also supports foreign language equivalents of a concept and additional alternate (nonpreferred) labels within those other languages. Standard relationships between concepts are broader, narrower, and related relationships, but customized relationships can also be supported.



Figure 11.3 An extract example of OWL (XML) representation for the concept “galactic clusters,” from the NASA thesaurus. (Vertical periods denote text cut out to save in the figure.)



Figure 11.4 An extract example of SKOS (XML) representation for the concept “galactic clusters,” from the NASA thesaurus

Most dedicated taxonomy management software, as listed in Chapter 5, supports exporting to SKOS now. Figures 11.3 and 11.4 present examples of OWL and SKOS representations of XML of a preferred term/concept in the NASA Thesaurus (the same as was presented in Figure 11.2 in ZThes, for comparison). The narrower and related concept relations are too numerous, so to save space only the first are shown (www.sti.nasa.gov/sti-tools/#thesaurus).

Additionally there is SKOS-XL, which defines an extension describing “lexical entities,” or terms, which are part of a concept. SKOS-XL thus helps support added metadata for specific terms (labels) that are part of a concept. Some, but not all, taxonomy management software that supports SKOS also supports SKOS-XL.

Thesaurus Standards and Exchange Formats

The World Wide Web Consortium is not the only organization interested in knowledge organization system exchange and interoperability. Coming from the other direction, the organizations that have developed thesaurus standards, the International Organization for Standards (ISO) and the National Information Standards Organization (NISO), have also more recently been working on exchange format recommendations for thesauri and other controlled vocabularies, which were out of the scope of the original standards documents.

When ISO updated its thesaurus standards, replacing 2788:1986 Guidelines for the establishment and development of monolingual thesauri and ISO 5964:1985 Guidelines for the establishment and development of multilingual thesauri with a set of new standards, ISO 25964 parts 1 and 2 (in 2011 and 2013), Thesauri and interoperability with other vocabularies, in addition to the original standards’ content, there are new sections added to ISO 25964 - Part 1 that deal with thesaurus data management, sharing and exchange. These are the sections: 14. Guidelines for thesaurus management software, 15. Data model, 16. Integration of thesauri with applications, 17. Exchange formats (listing options of MARC, SKOS, and Zthes), and 18. Protocols. In the Data model section, the recommendation is to use XML, and a specific UML (Unified Modeling Language) data model is proposed.2 ISO 25964 - Part 2, in the section on technical aspects of managing data (section 15.2.2), states: “A SKOS-compliant format is recommended if use in the Semantic Web is desired.” During 2012–2013 members of an ISO 25964 working group developed a set of linkages between the elements of the ISO 25964 standard and the SKOS data model, called “Correspondence between ISO 25964 and SKOS/SKOS-XL models” (www.niso.org/schemas/iso25964/#skos).

Although ANSI/NISO Z.39.19 (2005) does not discuss exchange formats, such as XML or SKOS, the National Information Standards Organization (NISO) launched in 2015 a working group project, “Development of Standards to Support Bibliographic Data Exchange.” Despite “bibliographic” in the name, the focus of the group is largely around vocabularies. One of the subgroup working areas for new guidelines or standards is focused on policies supporting vocabulary use and reuse.3

Taxonomy Updating

A taxonomy is never finished. As soon as it is implemented, it undergoes testing and revision, and continued use will dictate further enhancements. All taxonomies require ongoing maintenance, and many taxonomies also undergo more significant revisions or restructuring over time.

Taxonomy Maintenance

A taxonomy requires continual maintenance. Various kinds of changes can necessitate updates to a taxonomy:


       •  Ongoing user feedback suggests improvements.

       •  Quality control indicates preventable indexing inaccuracies.

       •  Additional content brings up new concepts.

       •  Certain previously included content is excluded or discontinued.

       •  New trends, buzzwords, and terminology arise in existing content.

       •  New audiences, users, markets, or implementations are added.



Taxonomy updating can be done continually or as periodic revision projects. If you have continued responsibility for the taxonomy, then you need to keep abreast of all the possible areas that may affect the taxonomy. This involves reviewing the following:


       •  Newly added content sources

       •  Parts of the taxonomy or vocabularies covering rapidly changing topics (e.g., events, news, and technology)

       •  Direct feedback from users (both indexers and end users)

       •  End-user search logs for additional search strings entered

       •  Term usage data in indexing/tagging (human or automated) to determine:

            –    High-use terms needing further differentiation through the addition of more specific terms

            –    Low/no-use terms that should be removed or merged

            –    Identifiable indexing errors that point to the need for clarifying terms



When merging one term with another, not only do you convert a preferred term (the obsolete term) into a nonpreferred term for another preferred term, but ideally you want all of the obsolete term’s nonpreferred terms to become nonpreferred terms for the newly merged preferred term. If there is a scope note for the obsolete term, that too should be moved over to the designated preferred term, but the taxonomist should review and edit the transferred or combined note. Some, but not all, taxonomy management software has a merge feature that, in a single step, allows a designated preferred term automatically to inherit the nonpreferred terms, notes, and other attributes of an obsolete term that is merged into it.

If the taxonomy set is segmented into subtaxonomies, vocabularies, facets, or authority files, some of these vocabularies will require more frequent updating than others, depending on their coverage. As a rule, named entities require more frequent updates than topical terms. Concepts should have some staying power, whereas relevant people, products, organizations, and so on may come and go. For example, new terms for types of products occur less frequently than new named product models. Simply keeping abreast of the latest news within a field is also a good idea for the taxonomist in charge of taxonomy maintenance.

When it comes to reviewing the indexing, you need to define what the thresholds are for “high-use” terms and “low-use” terms and determine what counts as an error. High use may be defined relative to other terms, but you should also consider how search results display. Depending on the user’s ability to narrow results, one, two, or three screenfuls of search results per term (10, 20, or 30 records) could be considered enough. Low-use terms could be anything with fewer than three matches, but you also have to consider the time span. In the case of errors, it is necessary to have a clearly defined policy as to what constitutes an error, as well as a procedure to identify and track errors. Indexing is sometimes subjective, so you need to draw the line between “good enough” and “not good enough.”

Ideally, you should use the same thesaurus software used in creating the taxonomy (as described in Chapter 5) to make updates to the taxonomy. Updating a taxonomy may include any of the following:


       •  Creating new terms

       •  Splitting existing terms (creating two new terms and removing an old one)

       •  Deleting terms

       •  Merging terms (including deleting a term and making it nonpreferred for an existing term)

       •  Changing the wording of a term (including keeping an old name as a nonpreferred term)

       •  Adding relationships (hierarchical or associative) between existing terms

       •  Deleting relationships between existing terms

       •  Changing relationships between existing terms (deleting and replacing with a different relationship)

       •  Adding nonpreferred terms to an existing term

       •  Adding scope notes to existing terms

       •  Adding other new information, attributes, categories, and so on to existing terms

       •  Moving a branch/subhierarchy within a hierarchical taxonomy to a new location



If the taxonomy/thesaurus software and the indexing system are integrated, there should be no complications when it comes to updating the taxonomy. But if, as is often the case, the taxonomy is maintained in one software system and indexing and/or search is conducted in a different system, the taxonomy updates need to be ported to it. If possible, set up some kind of schedule for regular updates, whether daily, weekly, or monthly. Taxonomy updates might need to be scheduled during a time when indexing is not taking place, perhaps outside regular working hours.

Then there is the matter of applying new or changed taxonomy terms to previously indexed content. Nonpreferred terms should take care of this automatically in the case of simple term changes. But if you create new terms or split an existing term into two terms, then retroactive indexing can be an issue, and this task may fall to the taxonomist and not the indexers. There may be the resources to retroactively index only selected documents that are considered important rather than all possible documents pertaining to the new term. One option is to have scripts written to make global changes to indexing when terms change in the taxonomy, or you can make use of interfaces that display term splits along with associated records so that you can assign more precise terminology to older documents.

Taxonomy Revisions

A taxonomy could require significant revisions for various reasons. Its maintenance may have been neglected over several years due to lack of a taxonomist, and evolutionary changes in content and audience/market over time eventually necessitate a more thorough review and overhaul. A conversion from human indexing to automated indexing would require a reexamination of the taxonomy to eliminate ambiguous terms and to increase the number of nonpreferred terms. If accumulated content has increased beyond initial expectations, it might be deemed necessary to expand a relatively small taxonomy in order to support indexing in detail (granularity), for more refined search results. A hierarchical taxonomy that previously excluded polyhierarchies may now permit them. More complex taxonomy revisions involve implementing a decision to convert a controlled vocabulary into a thesaurus or a hierarchical taxonomy or to convert a thesaurus or hierarchical taxonomy into a faceted taxonomy.

For example, a number of literature retrieval vendors in the United States chose initially to base their controlled vocabularies on Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH), because it was the largest general-purpose controlled vocabulary available. However, for many decades it lacked hierarchical relationships between terms (with no distinction between hierarchical and associative relationships). Organizations that used controlled vocabularies based on LCSH and later decided it would be better to have a true thesaurus then had to undertake a major taxonomy revision project to convert generic See also relationships into proper broader term (BT), narrower term (NT), or related term (RT) relationships. For a controlled vocabulary of tens of thousands of terms, this kind of project can take years.

Taxonomy revision projects follow some of the same steps as new taxonomy projects, depending on the type of revision. If there has been a significant change in content, then a content review or audit is required. If a taxonomy is to be totally restructured, then stakeholder interviews would be a good idea. More specifically, if a controlled vocabulary will be converted to a hierarchical taxonomy, then a card-sorting exercise would also be a good idea.

Combining Taxonomies

In addition to revising a single taxonomy, a common taxonomy management project involves combining two or more taxonomies. Different ways to combine taxonomies include the following:


       •  Integrating: Combining separate taxonomies on different subjects into a single master taxonomy for combined use

       •  Merging: Combining two redundant taxonomies in the same subject area into one (not retaining them as distinct)

       •  Mapping: Enabling one taxonomy to be used for another in the same subject area, while retaining them both as continued distinct taxonomies



Integrating focuses more on structure, whereas merging and mapping tend to ignore the structure and the relationships between concepts and focus on the terms. In all cases, the combined taxonomies may have previously been used separately. Integrating or mapping can also be used to combine an existing taxonomy with a newly created one.

Integrating Taxonomies

Integrating taxonomies involves combining previously separate vocabularies, hierarchies, authority files, or subtaxonomies that have different concepts into a single master taxonomy. Integrating allows for combined use in the same search/browse user interface and for a shared content repository. (“Combined use” does not, however, mean that terms from the different taxonomies must be combined in search execution, as in a faceted search.) The subject area scope of the different taxonomies may be related, but for the most part, they should not be overlapping or redundant, as the objective is to have them supplement each other. If the taxonomies were redundant, then the strategy would be to merge, rather than integrate, them. Reasons to integrate taxonomies include, but are not limited to, the following:


       •  A larger organizational taxonomy is built by combining existing departmental taxonomies.

       •  An additional facet is added to an existing faceted taxonomy, based on user feedback.

       •  A manufacturer or distributor adds a new product line, requiring that a new product/topic hierarchy be added to its website.

       •  An online database provider adds a new database product that requires a new authority file.

       •  An internally created taxonomy is supplemented by a purchased/licensed taxonomy in a complementary subject area in order to expand its scope.

       •  A company expands into a new geographic market and needs to add geographic and named organizational terms to cover that area.

       •  An organization acquires or merges with another organization, and their taxonomies in various operational areas need to be integrated.



Integrating taxonomies works well for hierarchical or faceted taxonomies, in which it is not difficult to add a hierarchy or facet. It is also quite simple to add a new named entity authority file to a collection of controlled vocabularies. Supplementing an existing topical thesaurus with an additional subject area, however, is more complicated. This is because at some point you will need to create relationships between the existing terms and the newly added terms, even if only associative relationships, and you will need to individually identify the relevant terms.

The previously separate taxonomies may have been created within the same organization, but most likely they originate from different sources. In some cases, the taxonomy to be integrated is sufficiently complete and fully structured, while in other cases, it requires significant editing and restructuring to conform to the format and standards of the rest of your taxonomy. While it may even be necessary to build a new subtaxonomy from scratch, this is not likely to occur at this stage, when resources are focused on taxonomy enhancement rather than construction. In other words, the person responsible for managing a taxonomy may not have the additional time needed to build a new subtaxonomy.

The main work for a taxonomist in an integration project is to study the potential issues and make recommendations for the integration, especially with respect to the overall taxonomy structure and any relationships between new terms and those already in the taxonomy. You will also need to come up with indexing and editorial policies for the new taxonomy and incorporate them into the existing governance procedure and documentation.

Assuming that the taxonomy to be integrated comes from an external source, the most crucial issue to deal with is data exchange (interoperability). As previously mentioned, any taxonomy that is imported in a nonstandard XML format will need a schema. Even if the format is not an issue, a taxonomy from another source will inevitably lack some of the values associated with terms in your existing taxonomy. These could include sequential numbers, categories or classes, additional attributes, additional relationship types, and history notes. (The imported taxonomy could have additional attributes, but those could be simply ignored.) Some of this information can perhaps be added in batches to the terms in the new taxonomy, while other information may have to be added to terms individually, and some information may simply be omitted because there is no support for it.

Merging Taxonomies

Another type of project involving pre-existing taxonomies is the complete merging of two or more taxonomies. Pre-existing taxonomies in the same or similar subject areas may need to be combined under various circumstances, including but not limited to the following:


       •  A new enterprise taxonomy replaces the separate taxonomies of multiple administrative departments.

       •  An information vendor merges different search taxonomies that had previously been used for different search products (used for different markets, media, content, etc.).

       •  A folksonomy is incorporated into the taxonomy.

       •  An organization acquires or merges with another organization, and their redundant vocabularies (whether they are enterprise taxonomies or consumer search taxonomies) are merged.

       •  An internally created taxonomy is combined with a purchased/licensed taxonomy in the same subject area to enhance it.



In merging two or more taxonomies, the process will be simpler if you can designate one taxonomy as the primary or dominant taxonomy into which you will merge the other(s). The decision as to which taxonomy is primary might be made for you, such as when one organization acquires another (typically the acquirer’s taxonomy is primary). In other cases, it may not be obvious or even matter which taxonomy should be dominant. You will need to scan both or all taxonomies involved to compare and choose the dominant taxonomy. The dominant taxonomy may be the one that is significantly larger, has greater breadth, has greater depth, has the best skeleton or top structure, is more highly structured if that is important, or is generally a “better” taxonomy in accordance with standards and best practices.

The first step in merging involves automated matching to compare the two taxonomies to identify and classify matches, whether exact or close. Some commercial taxonomy applications, such as Synaptica and Wordmap, include an automatic vocabulary-matching feature, which is especially useful if both taxonomies are already managed in that software. Often one taxonomy is from an external source, so having someone write a custom program or script (e.g, Perl scripting language) to compare the vocabularies might be easier if resources permit. You should compare only two taxonomies at a time. If there are more than two taxonomies to be merged, compare each merging taxonomy with the primary taxonomy separately. Merging focuses on terms only; hierarchical and associative relationships are ignored during merging. Equivalence relationships, on the other hand, are important in merging.

In any case, an output for human review would typically be in a table or a spreadsheet with one column for one taxonomy, a second column for the other taxonomy, and corresponding matched terms in the same row. In a third column to the side or in between, you as the reviewer may enter y or n for yes or no to accept or reject the match or perhaps enter some other notation to provide a more specific judgment about the relationship between the pairs of terms.

Automated matching should identify and list the following types of matches, along with the match type (the basis of the match). If you are using your own scripting language, then the following should be sequential comparison passes:


       1.  Exact matches of a preferred term in the merging taxonomy with a preferred term in the primary taxonomy.

       2.  Exact matches of a preferred term in the merging taxonomy with a nonpreferred term in the primary taxonomy. For example, the primary taxonomy has the term cars, and the merging taxonomy has automobiles USE cars.

       3.  Exact matches of a preferred term in the primary taxonomy with a nonpreferred term in the merging taxonomy (whereby the corresponding preferred term in the merging taxonomy does not match any term in the primary taxonomy). For example, the primary taxonomy has the term cars, and the merging taxonomy has cars USE automobiles, but the primary taxonomy does not have automobiles, even as a nonpreferred term. (In these circumstances, automobiles will become a new nonpreferred term in the final merged taxonomy.)

       4.  Matches of a nonpreferred term in the merging taxonomy with a nonpreferred term in the primary taxonomy (for which the corresponding preferred terms do not exist in either taxonomy), although this would be rare. For example, the primary taxonomy has cars USE autos, and the merging taxonomy has cars USE automobiles, but the primary taxonomy does not have automobiles, and the merging taxonomy does not have autos. The corresponding preferred term (automobiles) of the nonpreferred term (cars) within the merging taxonomy should be considered as an additional nonpreferred term for the corresponding preferred term (autos) in the primary taxonomy.

       5.  Close, but not exact, matches between a preferred term in the merging taxonomy and a preferred term or nonpreferred term in the primary taxonomy (also called fuzzy matches), based on ignoring the following differences between pairs of terms:

          a.  Hyphens, parentheses, punctuation, and spaces (such as healthcare/health care)

          b.  Plural/singular (such as teaching method/teaching methods)

          c.  Common abbreviations and acronyms (such as and/&, dept./department), based on a provided list

          d.  Words of a term appearing in a different order (such as photography, digital and digital photography)

          e.  The addition of certain listed words, such as industry or services (as in healthcare and healthcare services)

          f.  Different grammatical endings on the same root word (such as production/producing)



For matches to preferred terms in the primary taxonomy (the first and second types of matches in the preceding list), nothing needs to be done, and no human (taxonomist) review is necessary. For all subsequent types, a taxonomist should review the automatically generated matches. Table 11.1 summarizes the kinds of automated term matches between a “merging taxonomy” and the “primary taxonomy” and indicates which types require review by a taxonomist.

Table 11.1 Automated term matches that require review by a taxonomist








Merging Taxonomy

Primary Taxonomy

Review?




Exact matches of:

 

 




   Preferred term

Preferred term

 




   Preferred term

Nonpreferred term

 




   Nonpreferred term

Preferred term

yes




   Nonpreferred term

Nonpreferred term

yes




Inexact matches of:

 

 




   Preferred term

Preferred term

yes




Additional types of matches will generate candidates for nonpreferred terms from the merging taxonomy, and the taxonomist should approve them for addition to the primary taxonomy. Depending on the reason for designating one taxonomy as primary, you might also make use of the match results to consider whether to change the name of a preferred term of the primary taxonomy to that of an equivalent term used in the merging taxonomy, if it seems like a better wording for the concept.

After the automated matches have been generated, you need to analyze the remaining unmatched terms from each taxonomy more closely. You can temporarily sort and interfile them alphabetically, with terms from each taxonomy distinguished from each other in some way, such as font style. Then you can scan the list for additional potential matches based on the start of the terms. It is here that your skills in identifying valid equivalence relationships come into play.

Finally, in cases where there are completely different terms in the two taxonomies, there is no need to change terms in the primary taxonomy, and you should evaluate unmatched terms from the merging taxonomy individually for possible inclusion in the taxonomy. You need to pay special attention to where these terms might belong hierarchically when added to the primary taxonomy. If the new terms from the merging taxonomy comprise entirely new hierarchies or subhierarchies, it might make more sense to import the terms along with their relationships, rather than having to recreate the hierarchical relationships between them.

Mapping Taxonomies

In certain circumstances, two pre-existing taxonomies covering the same subject area may be integrated to serve unified retrieval yet remain intact for continued separate use as well. This combination enables one taxonomy to be used at the front end (in the searcher’s user interface) while the other taxonomy is used at the back end (indexed to the content) for a specific content set. Thus, the taxonomy that the user sees at the front end continues to retrieve its content as before, along with additional content indexed with the other taxonomy. The taxonomies are matched, or more specifically “mapped,” term-by-term where matches are sufficiently equivalent. Hierarchical and associative relationships are largely ignored for mapping.

The notion of mapping is probably most familiar to information professionals who work with metadata, since mapping projects are frequently used to support interoperability among metadata stored in different standards, such as MARC and variations of Dublin Core. As there are standards of metadata, so are there somewhat standardized mapping tables, known as crosswalks. In fact, “crosswalks” is sometimes used to mean mappings. Vocabulary or taxonomy mapping is quite different, however. Instead of mapping metadata (instructions for data), you are mapping the actual data, which is every term in a taxonomy.

Situations in which one taxonomy is mapped to another include, but are not limited, to the following:


       •  Selected internal content from an enterprise taxonomy is made available on a public website that has a different, public-facing taxonomy.

       •  A content provider with a taxonomy partners with a third-party information vendor with its own taxonomy to expand the market of its content.

       •  A provider of scientific/technical/medical content, which already has a detailed taxonomy, develops a new information service aimed at laypeople or students and creates a simpler taxonomy for it.

       •  A large collection of search log query terms needs to be integrated into the taxonomy as additional nonpreferred terms.

       •  Federated search, involving multiple data repositories, each with its own search engine and taxonomy, is implemented.

       •  Content will be made available in a different language region, and a comparable taxonomy already exists in the other language.



In a mapping project, it is important to know which taxonomy will appear in the user interface and which taxonomy will be linked to content. You need to be aware of the direction of information flow, which is from content to user, and thus map in this same direction, from the terms in what we will call the indexing taxonomy to terms in the retrieval taxonomy. Since mapping involves making equivalence relationships between the terms in one taxonomy and the terms in the other taxonomy, one taxonomy is being collectively “used for” the other taxonomy. Therefore one taxonomy needs to be preferred, like a preferred term, and the other taxonomy is nonpreferred. The preferred taxonomy is the retrieval taxonomy, and the nonpreferred taxonomy is the indexing taxonomy.

As with merging projects, mapping involves automatic matching first, followed by a human review. You can use the same series of matching types listed for merging taxonomies for mapping taxonomies, and you can use the same tools to do it. There are two main differences, however, between merging and mapping. First, in projects involving merging, any remaining unmatched terms are simply added to enhance the merged taxonomy, but in mapping, you are not creating a new taxonomy or adding new terms, so any unmatched terms unfortunately cannot be utilized. Second, creating matches for mapping is not limited to equivalence relationships. A narrower term can be mapped to a broader term, as long as it is going from the indexing taxonomy (NT) to the retrieval taxonomy (BT). This is an application of upward posting, whereby a broader term can be used for a narrower term. Consequently, it may happen that more than one narrower term in the indexing taxonomy is mapped to a single term that is broader in the retrieval taxonomy. Many-to-one mapping is acceptable but should not be too extensive.

With narrower-to-broader mapping permitted, automated matching could also include phrase matches of terms in the retrieval taxonomy that are phrases within terms in the indexing taxonomy. This is because a noun phrase found within a longer noun phrase has a good chance of being more generic (broader) than the longer and thus more specific noun phrase. For example, see the following:







Indexing taxonomy:

Retrieval taxonomy:




HDTV television sets

television sets




Television sets is a noun phrase within HDTV television sets, whereby the shorter phrase of television sets is indeed the broader concept. So the narrower term HDTV television sets would be automatically mapped “upward” to television sets. Not all term-within-a-term phrases are hierarchically related, however, so you should review such automated matches carefully.

As with merging taxonomies, it is easiest for you to quickly review numerous automated matches if they are in a spreadsheet format, where one column is used for the indexing taxonomy and another column for the retrieval taxonomy with matched terms in the same row. Figure 11.5 is an excerpt of a mapping table in which column A contains the indexing taxonomy, column C is for the retrieval taxonomy, and column B is where the taxonomist has marked the acceptability of the mapping as OK, not OK (n), and broader (b, which is acceptable for upward posting). For example, promoters (entertainment) has promoters as a broader term, but prolactin is neither equivalent to nor narrower than prolactin test, so this is not a match.



Figure 11.5 A mapping table representing an indexing taxonomy in column A, a retrieval taxonomy in column C, and taxonomist notes in column B: ok is equivalent, b is broader (so also ok for upward posting), and n is not acceptable

In mapping projects, it is all right if you cannot map a term in the retrieval taxonomy to a term in the indexing taxonomy because the retrieval taxonomy terms still have other uses. If, however, you cannot map a term in the indexing taxonomy to a term in the retrieval taxonomy, then any content indexed with that term will not be retrievable with the mapped taxonomy. Whether you should add any preferred terms to the retrieval taxonomy is another question, which is beyond the scope of the mapping project. This should be decided early on, though, so that you can identify these terms while reviewing the matches.

Guidelines for mapping thesauri are presented in ISO 25964-2 Thesauri and interoperability with other vocabularies -- Part 2: Interoperability with other vocabularies, and their inclusion was new to this 2013 version of standards. In fact, the kind of “interoperability” that this document discusses is mostly mapping, and roughly half of the standard (34 pages) deals with mapping between thesauri. (In other parts of the standard, there are guidelines for mapping between different types of vocabularies, such as between a taxonomy and a thesaurus, or between a name authorities and a thesaurus.) The different kinds of mapping ISO 25964 describes are hierarchical, associative, exact, inexact, and partial mappings. While ANSI/NISO Z39.19 is generally considered equivalent to ISO 25964, the sections on mapping thesauri are currently found only in ISO 25964 and not in ANSI/NISO Z39.19-2015.

Since mappings between active taxonomies is something that must be maintained, in contrast to integration and merging projects, taxonomy management software can support mappings between vocabularies as yet another kind of relationship. Most major taxonomy management software now has this mapping support feature. An additional automatic vocabulary-matching feature included in some taxonomy management software, as mentioned in the previous section on merging taxonomies, may also be used for the initial task of mapping.

Furthermore, SKOS includes specifications of standard mapping relationships. Since use of SKOS assumes that some automated process of mapping might be involved, the SKOS recommendation includes several different kinds or levels of mapping, which are described in the ISO 25964-2 standard: closeMatch, exactMatch, broadMatch, narrowerMatch, and relatedMatch.

Linked Data Taxonomies

Another, newer way to connect taxonomies is through Linked Data methods. Linked Data is a set of W3C specifications for web publishing that makes the data or content part of the Semantic Web. This means that instead of manually following individually created hyperlinks, semantic links and computer readable formats support automated relevant linkages among web content. Linked Data, coined by Tim Berners-Lee of the World Wide Web Consortium in 2009, comprises (1) URIs as names of things, (2) HTTP URIs for looking up, (3) using W3C standards (RDF and SPARQL) to describe the content, and (4) links out to other URIs (www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html). Additionally if the information is available on the web with an open license, then it is considered to be Linked Open Data (LOD). An example of a Linked Data dataset is DBPedia (an extraction of Wikipedia).

Taxonomies can make use of Linked Data or Linked Open Data in various ways. Although serving as labels to linked content is the most common method, taxonomy terms (actually concepts) themselves can be the content that is linked to. If taxonomy concepts are individually assigned URIs and HTTP addresses, are in an RDF format (such as SKOS), and links are actually made, then concepts in one taxonomy can link to those in another taxonomy somewhere else on the web. An example can be seen in the preloaded AGROVOC Thesaurus within the open source, web-based VocBench taxonomy management software. Figure 11.6 shows a screenshot from within the VocBench application, where the taxonomy concept “islands” is selected. Under the tab for the concept’s Alignments are four URLs/URIs linking directly the same concept/term in four other controlled vocabularies on the web.



Figure 11.6 Screenshot from the VocBench open source taxonomy management software, which makes use of Linked Data to link a concept, “islands,” in its taxonomy to the same in other taxonomies on the web

Multilingual Taxonomies

With the global expansion of business and information, adding a second-language version to a taxonomy is not uncommon. A taxonomy in more than one language enables:


       1.  Users to search content that includes text and/or metadata in multiple languages, by using a single taxonomy in their own language, which is mapped to the foreign language taxonomies

       2.  Different users who speak different languages to search the same body of content (which may be in one language or more), using a taxonomy in the user interface in their native language



(In either case, after retrieving a document in a foreign language, the user could have it translated.)

An example of a publicly accessible, multilingual online thesaurus is the AGROVOC Thesaurus of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) (aims.fao.org/vest-registry/vocabularies/agrovoc-multilingual-agricultural-thesaurus) in which selected concepts display all other language equivalents plus any alternate labels (nonpreferred terms) within those languages. (See Figure 11.7.) The user can also designate the language in which to search the thesaurus, and a search term in any language will retrieve the same concept record, but the broader, narrower, and semantic/related relationships will display for the selected language.



Figure 11.7 Display of a selected English-language term in the AGROVOC Thesaurus showing its multiple language equivalents with alternate labels in italics (aims.fao.org/vest-registry/vocabularies/agrovoc-multilingual-agricultural-thesaurus)

Multilingual Taxonomy Development

A second-language version of a taxonomy should be treated as another way of combining two taxonomies, essentially by mapping, rather than as a simple translation of a taxonomy into another language. Merely adding translations to terms would not support navigation between terms with hierarchical or associative relationships within a second language, and the translation is then no more helpful than a scope note. Furthermore, not every term in one language has an exact translation in another language, especially in the case of nonpreferred terms. In the mapping analogy, the retrieval taxonomy is in the language of the searcher, and the indexing taxonomy is in the language of the content. However, the role of the different language taxonomies is typically dynamic, depending on the language of the user and the accessed content at any given time. The taxonomy in either language could be the retrieval taxonomy or the indexing taxonomy. Therefore, mapping has to go in both directions, which means that matches between terms in both language taxonomies need to be more exact. Narrower-to-broader mappings will not work in both directions. ISO 25964-1, Section 9, “Equivalence across languages,” discusses these issues in greater detail.

While some taxonomies are designed to be bilingual or multilingual from the start, it is a more typical scenario that an organization adds a second language after a taxonomy has been in use. Either a taxonomy is translated term-by-term, or if an equivalent taxonomy already exists in the desired second language in the same subject area(s), it may be preferable to map the second-language taxonomy to the original (English-language) taxonomy.

This is not a typical mapping, because, as mentioned previously, equivalence must operate in both directions rather than one-way. A translator, rather than a taxonomist, should handle this mapping, since awareness of broader/narrower distinctions is not even needed, but translation experience is important. It will also likely be necessary to add terms to the second-language taxonomy when it lacks equivalent terms.

Whether translating a taxonomy or mapping to a second-language equivalent taxonomy already in existence, it is important to remember that the matches need to be for concepts, not term names. In addition, even if you are focusing on concepts, not terms, not all relationships between terms will match exactly in another language. When concepts in two languages are not perfect matches, the relationships between them most likely vary slightly as well. There are also cultural influences on what constitutes a relationship.

If a taxonomy is to be translated, it is more complicated than a typical translation project. Professional translators translate text in sentences, and they discern the meaning of potentially ambiguous words from the context. A taxonomy is a list of terms out of context. Instead of reading sentences, the translator of a taxonomy needs to look up a term’s nonpreferred terms, scope notes, and hierarchical and associative relationships to be certain of the meaning of the term. Typical translation fees based on per-word rates cannot be applied in such situations, since it takes time to translate each term. Furthermore, while translators typically translate only into their native languages, a sufficiently bilingual translator who has experience translating in both directions is preferable for translating a taxonomy because all translations of taxonomy terms will need to function in both directions to support both the retrieval of multilingual content and the browsing by different language users. In addition, since you are unlikely to find a translator who is also a taxonomist, you should arrange for a native speaker of the second language who is an information specialist/librarian to review the translated taxonomy.

Other matters to take into consideration when developing multilingual taxonomies are support for characters in the writing systems of other languages, translation of the user interface, and adaptations for cultural differences. Remember to have everything in the user interface translated, including menus, instructions, pop-ups, help files, and so on. Other language-specific issues to consider include the editorial style for displayed terms (such as the use of plural forms and capitalization) and the “logical” sort orders of terms. Taken collectively, translation plus other language and region-specific adaptations (currencies, measurements, date/time formats, etc.), particularly for software and online user interfaces, is referred to as localization. There are companies and consultants that specialize in providing software and interface localization services. Finally, there are cultural differences in user search behavior that you may need to take into consideration. For example, it is possible that in another country, a different facet might be used for the same content because in that culture different criteria are important.

Finally, attention must be paid to governance and maintenance of taxonomies in multiple languages. Often a contract translator translates a taxonomy but is no longer available to help maintain it. When new terms are added or existing terms are changed in the English-language taxonomy, someone needs to take care of adding or changing the second-language equivalents. Too often organizations fail to keep taxonomies in second languages as up to date as the taxonomy in the original language. It is also important to have a native speaker of the second language periodically check the function of the taxonomy for quality control purposes.

Software Management of Multilingual Taxonomies

Almost all taxonomy management software now supports multilingual taxonomies in some form or another. Such software supports special characters and often different language scripts, and also has features for designating a language, as vocabulary metadata. The actual management of multilingual vocabularies, however, with equivalent translations linked to each other and relationships between terms within additional languages, can vary.

Traditional thesaurus management software (not SKOS based) that has a designated multilingual feature would typically treat links to language translation terms as a completely different relationship type. Although language translations are “equivalent” terms, the relationship type is not a form of thesaurus equivalence, because traditional equivalence is to designate nonpreferred terms, and terms in another language are not nonpreferred. All languages have their own preferred terms and nonpreferred terms. Rather, the link between translations of the same term in different languages is a kind of equivalent vocabulary relationship, similar to a relationship to maintain the mapping of vocabularies.

In thesaurus management software that does not have dedicated multilingual taxonomy support but does support customized relationships, you could create customized relationship types for translations, such as one called EN>FR and its reciprocal called FR>EN, to support links between English- and French-language preferred terms. The hierarchical and associative relationships between terms in one language, however, would have to be manually recreated between terms in the second language. While this is added work, it does allow more flexibility, especially in the more subjective area of when to create associative relationships.

In truly multilingual thesaurus software, use of a language equivalency relationship will additionally cause the automatic inheritance of hierarchical and associative relationships among terms in the first language to occur between terms within the second language. Nonpreferred terms are always created individually and are not linked between languages. MultiTes and Synaptica are examples of thesaurus software that have this feature. MultiTes has supported multilingual thesauri since its inception, which is what the prefix “multi” in the product name stands for. In MultiTes, you can also toggle between which language is set as the “active language,” that is, the language whose alphabetical display and hierarchical reports are the default.

The SKOS framework supports multilingual vocabularies by having concepts instead of terms, so a concept may have multiple preferred labels, each in a different language, and multiple nonpreferred labels for each language. Thus, SKOS-based vocabulary management software is natively fully multilingual. The only possible limitations are the number of foreign language special characters and scripts the software may support. As newer vocabulary management software tends to be SKOS based, full multilingual vocabulary support is becoming more common. Figure 11.8 shows an XML presentation in SKOS of a vocabulary concept in three languages, English, French, and Spanish, with an additional alternate label in each of the three languages.



Figure 11.8 SKOS XML of a vocabulary concept, “Low-protein diets,” in English, French, and Spanish from the AGROVOC Thesaurus

Endnotes

  1.  Stuart Laurie (director of sales engineering, Smartlogic), phone call with author, October 15, 2015, explaining why Semaphore discontinued its ZThes export option, as fewer users are interested in it.

  2.  Details of the ISO XML schema “Format for Exchange of Thesaurus Data Conforming to ISO 25964-1” on the NISO website, accessed December 20, 2015, www.niso.org/schemas/iso25964/schema-intro and the graphic of the UML model is available at www.niso.org/schemas/iso25964/Model_2011-06-02.jpg

  3.  National Information Standards Organization, “A Proposed NISO Work Item: Development of Standards to Support Bibliographic Data Exchange,” December 18, 2014, accessed October 28, 2015, www.niso.org/apps/group_public/download.php/14152/Bibliographic%20Roadmap%20Work%20Item%20Final%20for%20Voting%20Members.pdf


